---
Title: MV Paper Draft v1 - Current Biology
Author: Alberto Scarampi
Date: 09/05/2024
---

<style>
  @media print {
    body {
      font-size: 12pt;
      line-height: 20px;
      padding:7px;
      margin-right:2cm;
      margin-left:2cm;
      margin-top:0px;
	    margin-bottom:0px;
			max-width: 2500px;
   }
  }
</style>

<div style="text-align: left">

<span style="font-size:1.2em;">**[%Title]** </span>  
\
[%Author] 
\
[%Date] 
\
\



===



<span style="font-size:1.2em;"> **Genomic enrichment of mutations in membrane transporters underlies the adaptation of polyploid cyanobacteria to redox stress induced by methyl viologen** </span>  
\
Alberto Scarampi<sup>1</sup>, Joshua M. Lawrence<sup>1,2</sup>, Paolo Bombelli<sup>1</sup>, James Bridson<sup>1</sup>, Darius G. Kosmützky<sup>1 </sup>, Jenny Z. Zhang<sup>2 </sup>, Christopher J. Howe<sup>1,* </sup>   
\
<sup>1 </sup> Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, UK  
<sup>2 </sup>  Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, UK  
<sup>* </sup> Corresponding author: ch26@cam.ac.uk  
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify">

# Abstract
Cyanobacteria have transformed Earth's anoxic environment into an oxygen-rich atmosphere, enabling the emergence of aerobic organisms and necessitating the evolution of antioxidant defences against the reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated during oxygenic photosynthesis. Yet, the mechanisms underlying these evolutionary adaptations, especially under new anthropogenic pressures, are still unclear. Here, we applied adaptive laboratory evolution to the model cyanobacterium _Synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803, to evolve strains resistant to methyl viologen (MV), a potent ROS inducer used as herbicide in agriculture and redox mediator in electrochemistry. We successfully isolated eight strains from two phenotypically distinct parent substrains, showing up to 30-fold increased resistance compared to wild types. Genome sequencing identified several non-synonymous mutation specific to MV-resistant strains, mostly in genes encoding membrane transporters. 

==I would mention something here about a lack of understanding in how bacteria develop resistance to antibacterial compounds. Then you can relate this both to antibiotic production, and the adaptation of cyanobacteria to high oxygen production making it important for both medicine and ecology. I would then also mention that most model bacterial genetics uses monoploids (like E. coli) but most bacteria exhibit polyploidy and it is understudied to what extend this can influence genetic adaptation. This would set you up for everything else and hit all the important impactful points.==



===

# Introduction

Life on Earth began in the Archaean Eon under a reducing atmosphere (Dietrich, Tice & Newman, 2006), before the rise of cyanobacteria, the sole prokaryotes known to have evolved oxygenic photosynthesis (Brocks et al. 1999; Schirrmeister, Gugger & Donoghue 2015). The release of O<sub>2 </sub> as an end product of water oxidation led to the rise of oxygen, which eventually dramatically oxidised Earth’s atmosphere, oceans and all major biogeochemical cycles. The biological availability of O also allowed for the evolution of aerobic respiration and novel biosynthetic pathways, leading to complex multicellularity. As a consequence, the photosynthetic activity of cyanobacteria not only altered their surrounding environment, but necessitated the evolution of antioxidant defences to mitigate the cytotoxic effects of oxygen chemistry, namely the chemicals often referred to as reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Amel, Ruiz & Zhang, 2009).

The study of oxidative stress (OS), a state where excessive ROS production overwhelms antioxidant defences, has been advanced by using xenobiotics that simulate OS conditions. Methyl viologen (MV), a bipyridinium compound known for inducing ROS, is a classic example. Initially synthesised by (Weidel & Russo, 1882), MV’s redox properties were recognised as a biochemical tool (Michaelis & Hill, 1933) before its potent, broad-spectrum herbicidal capabilities were commercialised (Brian et al., 1958). While its use as herbicides such as Paraquat has been banned due to toxicity concerns in some countries, MV persists environmentally and continues to be utilised in developing countries (Wesseling et al., 2001). In addition to its use in agriculture, MV is commonly used as redox mediator in (bio)electrochemical systems. Thanks to its high stability and low midpoint potential of -440 mV vs SHE (Gemünde et al., 2022), MV is employed as a robust electron shuttle to reduce a wide range of inorganic and biological electron acceptors. In the presence of molecular oxygen, MV can undergo rapid re-oxidation following the single-electron reduction from its divalent (MV2+) to monovalent (MV+) cationic state (Farrington et al., 1973). This results in oxygen scavenging and generation of ROS, with superoxide anions being the predominant species. In enzyme-based (_ex vivo_) bioelectrochemical devices, MV’s versatility has been demonstrated by employing it as an effective electron donor for nitrogenases, formate dehydrogenases and hydrogenases, allowing for enhanced bioelectrochemical production of ammonia, hydrogen and formate respectively (Milton et al. (2017); Jayathilake et al. (2019); Jiang et al. (2023)). Among other applications, MV can be interfaced _in vivo_ with non-photosynthetic bacteria for facilitating microbial reductive dichlorination of trichloroethylene (Aulenta et al., 2007), enhancing the performance of microbial fuel cells, and as a ROS-mediated redox inducer for electrogenetic devices (Lawrence et al., 2022).

However, the application of MV in bioelectrochemical system containing whole photosynthetic organisms is challenged by its cytotoxicity stemming from its ability to accept electrons from photosystem I and donate them to a wide variety of acceptors, including oxygen (Sétif, 2015). This limits the utility of MV as a stable and versatile redox mediator for rewiring photosynthetic electron transport chains in vivo (Lawrence et al., 2023) and threatens the stability and primary productivity in ecosystems contaminated with MV by human activity (Eisler, 1990). Given its toxicity, considerable research has been carried out to understand the effects of methyl viologen on photosynthetic organisms and the mechanisms underlying their resulting evolution of resistance against it. Because of their oxygenic activity analogous to that of plants, their fast growth rates, genetic amenability and biotechnological potential, cyanobacteria are ideal model systems for understanding herbicide resistance (Brusslan & Haselkorn, 1988). Early experiments on the effects of paraquat on cyanobacteria indicated that the abrupt killing action of paraquat was due to it being converted into a more powerful inhibitor within the cells (Vaishampayan, 1984). Subsequent studies confirmed that MV’s cytotoxicity in cyanobacteria is mediated by its ROS-inducing activity and results in the upregulation of antioxidant pathways (Thomas et al. (1998); Campbell & Laudenbach (1995); Li et al. (2002); Kim & Suh (2005)). Screening of artificially constructed mutants of the model cyanobacterium _Synechocystis_ indicated that deletion of redox signalling genes such as _spkB_ encoding a Serine/Threonine kinase (Mata-Cabana et al., 2012) and the gene slrr1415 encoding the primary NAD kinase, results in increased susceptibility to MV (Gao & Xu, 2012).

Several further studies have identified strains resistant to MV, where altered transmembrane permeability to MV, rather than modulation of antioxidant pathways, was implicated as the mechanism of resistance (Babykin et al. (2003); Nefedova et al. (2003); Prosecka et al. (2009)). However, recent contrasting evidence by (Oh & Montgomery, 2019) reported that a _Synechocystis_ mutant lacking _cpcG1_, encoding the linker protein that connects phycocyanin to the core phycobilisome allophycocyanin, exhibited insensitivity to MV treatment.

## Aims and Research Questions

Despite a long history of research, many questions remain open with regard to how cyanobacteria respond to redox stress induced by MV. A better understanding of this might help the development of bioelectrochemical applications benefitting from MV’s redox properties. It would also help our understanding of the biochemical mechanisms underlying cyanobacterial’s responses to extracellular electrochemical potentials. This chapter aims to address partly such lack in knowledge by answering the following questions:

1. **How do cyanobacteria respond to the redox-cycling drug methyl viologen?**
-- Is MV toxic to liquid _Synechocystis_ cultures?
-- Can cyanobacterial cultures recover from MV toxicity?
-- Does MV cause oxidative stress under the conditions used?
-- Does resistance to MV depend on long-term genetic plasticity or short-term metabolic plasticity?
1. **What are the mechanisms underlying MV adaptation in** **_Synechocystis_?**
-- Is the observed resistance to MV long-lasting even after the removal of selective pressure?
-- Are there specific mutations associated with MV-resistance and, if so, how do they arise?
1. **Are there phenotypic consequences associated with the evolution of MV resistance?**
-- How does the growth of MV-resistant strains compare with wild types ?
-- Does the evolution of MV resistance affect the ability to perform oxygenic photosynthesis?
1. **How does the evolution of MV resistance affect the electrogenic properties of cyanobacteria when employed in bioelectrochemical systems?**
-- Are there differences in photocurrent profiles from WT and MV-resistant strains in the presence and absence of MV?
-- Are there differences in extracellular MV concentration in the supernatants from WT and resistant cultures?
## Results

### Toxicity of MV to strains and recovery after prolonged growth

To investigate the effect of methyl viologen on cyanobacterial growth at different concentrations, growth measurements were performed on wild type _Synechocystis_ cultures following treatment with a range of MV concentrations. Starting from a solid BG11 plate, three independent wild type “Nixon” colonies were inoculated in liquid starter cultures, the cultures re-diluted after growth and then each flask was subdivided into 4 subcultures and grown under photoautotrophic conditions (40 molesms) in BG11. When the subcultures reached mid-log phase ( OD = 0.5), MV was added to the flasks at a range of final concentrations (0,1,10, or 100 M).

As shown in Fig.[1.1]()B, complete growth inhibition was observed following treatment with 1,10 and 100M MV, whereas untreated cultures (0M MV) continued growing at the same rate. After 24 hours post treatment, all cultures containing MV displayed lower optical density values than the day before, indicating a bactericidal effect of MV on _Synechocystis_ cultures for the given experimental conditions. Increasing MV concentrations did not lead to increasing death rates, indicating 1 M as the minimal lethal concentration tested. Maximal death rates were observed between 24 and 48 hours post exposure to MV. Cell density over time for treated cultures reached a steady state 3 days post treatment. During this time, all cultures treated with non-zero MV concentrations appeared visibly bleached, whereas untreated flasks remained green and healthy as shown by the pictures of some of the treated flasks displayed in Fig.[1.1]()B. Treated cultures showed no growth for 8-9 days following MV treatment. However, after this expected inhibitory effect, some treated cultures exhibited a surprising phase of growth recovery as observed by an increase in optical density measurements over time and the reappearance of green colour within the flasks. Interestingly, cultures treated with 1 M MV resumed their growth earlier than cultures treated with 10 M. No growth recovery was observed in flasks containing 100 M MV.

**A)** Diagram of the adaptive laboratory evolution procedure to evolve Synechocystis “Nixon’’ substrains to MV. **B)** Growth curves of Synechocystis strains grown in BG11 at 30C under constant illumination (intensity = 40 molesms) in the absence (red trace) and upon treatment with increasing MV concentrations (time of treatment depicted by black arrow).

#### Methyl viologen treatment leads to light-dependent oxidative stress

Methyl viologen (MV) is believed to exert its cytotoxic effects through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to cell death due to oxidative stress. To test if ROS were indeed being generated under the conditions used, a ROS quantification assay was performed. _Synechocystis_ cultures were treated with a lethal MV concentration (10 M MV) and incubated with the fluorophore 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA). DCFH-DA is hydrolysed by cellular esterases to 2’,7’-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (DCFH) and can be then oxidized to the fluorescent form 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescein (DCF) by reactive oxygen species. By monitoring the fluorescence intensity of cultures following MV treatment it is therefore possible to quantify intracellular oxidative stress. Notably, DCFH does not react selectively with specific forms of ROS and therefore can only provide an estimate of general oxidative stress within cells (Kalyanaraman et al., 2012). To test if ROS production was contingent on illumination, as expected, the assay was carried out with cultures incubated under light and dark conditions. Given extensive previous literature and the use of MV to simulate oxidative stress conditions, significant enhancement of oxidative stress as measured by DCF fluorescence was the expected outcome of this experiment.

A) DCF fluorescence in cultures of Synechocystis at various time points after treatment with 10 M MV (when cultures were incubated in the dark post treatment). B) DCF fluorescence at various time points after treatment with 10 M MV (under 40 molesms of white light illumination). C) Fold changes in DCF fluorescence between cultures treated with MV and no treatment control in darkness and light at various time points after treatment. Error bars represent standard error of the mean from three biological replicates.

As shown in Fig.[1.2](), a significant stimulatory effect on ROS production was evident in wild type _Synechocystis_ cells following MV treatment in both dark and light conditions.Treated and untreated cultures at time 0 displayed similar amount of “baseline’’ DCF fluorescence, indicating that cells had similar ROS content. However, the samples treated with MV started to display enhanced fluorescence values compared to untreated control by 2 hours post MV application. When cultures were incubated in the dark (Fig.[1.2]()A), DCF fluorescence increased for the 22 hours measured post treatment, corresponding to a 2.3 fold increase compared to untreated controls. When flasks were incubated under light irradiance, a more rapid and significantly enhanced increase in ROS production was observed. After two hours of exposure, illuminated treated samples had already exhibited a two-fold increase in intracellular ROS content, which increased for the 22 hours measured, reaching a value corresponding to a 10-fold increase compared to untreated controls in the same conditions. These results confirm that the MV concentration used in the adaptive experiment above leads to significant generation of ROS through a light-dependent mechanism (and may also generate some ROS in the absence of light).

#### Adaptation to methyl viologen is not due to its degradation over time

As demonstrated in Fig.[1.1]() and Fig.[1.2](), MV treatment led to rapid bactericidal effects in _Synechocystis_ cultures, which were characterised by significant upregulation of intracellular ROS production. Therefore, it was surprising to observe spontaneous growth resurgence following a period of complete bleaching and apparent growth arrest. A potential explanation for this phenomenon was offered by the possibility of degradation of MV, especially given the long duration of the experiment in warm and illuminated conditions. To discard this possibility and determine whether such recovery was a result of biological evolution of resistant strains, a further experiment was performed. Three independently adapted cultures originating from flasks that had recovered from the MV treatment alongside three “unadapted’’ wild type controls were diluted and subjected to an additional MV treatment from a freshly prepared stock solution of MV to a final concentration of 6 M. If previously adapted cultures displayed sensitivity to addition of fresh MV, this would indicate that the abiotic degradation of the chemical over time was responsible for the apparent growth recovery of the cultures.

Growth curves of three independent unadapted (A) and MV-adapted (B) cultures of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 growing at 30 C under constant illumination (intensity = 100 molesms) in the absence (green trace) and upon addition of 6 M of methyl viologen from a freshly prepared stock) (purple trace). Shaded regions represent standard deviations from three biological replicates.

When “unadapted” wild type strains were subjected to MV treatment from a freshly prepared stock solution (Fig.[1.3]()A), they displayed rapid growth inhibition as observed in the initial experiment shown in Fig.[1.1]()B. This indicated that the freshly prepared MV stock was active. On the other hand, previously adapted cultures subjected to MV exposure from the same freshly prepared stock remained insensitive to the treatment. Then, absorbance spectra of unadapted (A) and adapted (B) cultures were determined after 3 days of post treatment (Figure [1.4]()). Whereas addition of methyl viologen to unadapted strains resulted in absorption spectra with no peaks, adapted strains were able to maintain characteristic chlorophyll peaks upon addition of fresh methyl viologen. Introduction of methyl viologen to these strains appeared to result in some decrease in chlorophyll concentration per cell compared to non-treated controls. These results discarded the possibility that degradation of methyl viologen underscored the apparent growth recovery of _Synechocystis_ cultures and therefore indicated that some biological mechanisms were responsible for such adaptation.

Absorbance spectra of unadapted (A) and adapted (B) cultures of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 after 3 days post MV treatment at 30  under constant illumination (intensity = 100 molesms) in the absence (green trace) and upon addition of 6  of methyl viologen during exponential growth (purple trace). Shaded regions represent standard errors from three biological replicates. Each absorbance spectra was normalised between 0 and 1 relative to the minimum and maximal values for each curve

#### Possible growth-phase dependence of emergence of MV resistance

After confirming that a biological mechanism, rather than abiotic degradation, was likely to play a role in the observed adaptation, additional adaptive laboratory experiments were performed. These aimed to evolve additional strains and study the biological factors contributing to the emergence of resistance. For example, in clinically-relevant pathogenic bacteria, the development of antimicrobial resistance is often dependent on the cellular metabolic state and therefore on growth phase during which the bacteria are exposed to the antibiotic. To investigate whether the same applied to development of resistance to MV by cyanobacterial cultures evolving resistance to MV, an additional growth curve was conducted, where the same amount of MV was introduced into the cultures at different growth stages. Starting from three independent wild type colonies originating from the same plate, three inocula corresponding to the three biological replicates were used to set up cultures. These were diluted after growth and each replicate was then subdivided into 4 new flasks. MV was added at early exponential phase, mid-log phase, stationary phase or not at all. As shown in Fig.[1.5](), MV treatment resulted in growth inhibition in all treated cultures regardless of the initial growth stage, as expected. However, as observed by the rates of growth decline following MV exposure, the later in the growth curve MV was applied, the more pronounced MV’s growth inhibitory effects were. Following the 24 hours post MV treatment, cultures treated in early exponential phase exhibited a growth rate of  (ODday), in mid-log phase the growth rate was  and in stationary phase . Therefore, the growth inhibiting effects of MV applied during stationary phase appeared to be approximately five times stronger than in early exponential phase. In addition, whereas in the ALE experiment shown in Fig.[1.1]() all replicates treated with 1 or 10 M exhibited growth recovery following a period of complete bleaching, during this experiment only one replicate treated in mid-log phase adapted to MV exposure. All the remaining cultures never recovered from the period of apparent growth arrest and no viable colonies appeared when samples from these cultures were streaked on solid BG11 plates. These results indicated that only treatment during the mid-log phase led to evolution of MV resistance.

Growth curves of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 “Howe’’ strains grown at 30  under constant illumination (intensity = 100 molesms) in the absence (red trace) and upon addition of 6 M of methyl viologen during various growth stages (as indicated by the coloured arrows).

#### MV resistance does not depend on a functional prqA

Previous findings reported that a mutation in the DNA-binding domain of the PrqR repressor led to resistance to methyl viologen (Babykin et al., 2003). Because PrqR was found to repress expression of the multidrug and toxin extrusion (MATE) protein PrqA, it was suggested that PrqR was involved in the detoxification of methyl viologen via extrusion mechanisms. To test this, a further adaptation experiment was performed using _Synechocystis_ strains in which the prqA gene was deleted to determine the effect of PrqA on MV susceptibility. The plasmids pAST28 (whose assembly is detailed in [[Pro:RE]]()) or an empty vector control (pJMLT200, Section [[fig:prqRAreporters]]()) were used for complementation. As shown in Figure [1.6]()A, when MV was added to the cultures to 6 M, all strains exhibited the characteristic growth inhibition observed before. The growth rates of the different strains at various time points following MV treatment ([1.6]()C) did not show any statistically significant differences between each other, indicating that the presence of the PrqA does not have any significant effect on the susceptibility of the cells to this lethal MV concentration (assuming it is correctly expressed from pAST28). In addition, all substrains regardless of their genotype, displayed growth recovery following the usual period of apparent growth arrest. As demonstrated in [1.6]()B, both _prqA_ deletion and overexpression mutants adapted to MV similarly to wild type strains, implying that PrqA is not essential for the development of MV resistance.

**A.** Growth curves of wild-type (WT), prqA and complemented prqA (pAST28 plasmid expressing prqA from J23100 promoter) strains of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 “Nixon’’ grown at 30  under constant illumination (intensity = 40 molesms) in the absence and upon addition of 6M MV (as indicated by the black arrow). Dashed lines represent cultures treated with MV and solid ones illustrate untreated controls. EVC: empty vector control transformed in wild type and deletion mutants to ensure the same antibiotic resistance encoded by complemented strains. **B.** Same growth curve as in (A) showing the period in which strains evolved resistance against MV. **C.** Growth rates of treated Synechocystis substrains at various time points post MV treatment. Bars indicate average values over three biological replicates and error bars indicate standard deviations. 

#### Adaptation to methyl viologen is long-lasting even after removal of selective pressure

The results presented so far demonstrated that _Synechocystis_ cultures could spontaneously adapt to the toxic effects of methyl viologen and identified some of the factors affecting this phenomenon. However, the biochemical mechanisms underlying such adaptation remained unresolved. Adapted phenotypes can emerge because of genetic changes followed by natural selection. Alternatively, an adaptive phenotype can also arise as the result of some short-term phenotypic adjustments occurring in the metabolism of individual cells in response to the environment. The ability to make such changes is often referred to as “phenotypic plasticity’’, when one genotype can lead to more than one phenotype when exposed to different environments (Corona & Martinez, 2013). In the context of cyanobacterial adaptation to methyl viologen, it may be reasonable to consider such phenotypic plasticity a result of upregulation of antioxidant enzymes (e.g. superoxide dismutases) or pigments (e.g. carotenoids) in mother cells exposed to MV and later transferred into daughter cells. For this reason, an additional experiment was performed to assess whether the observed MV adaptation was a result of genetic changes or phenotypic plasticity. If the adaptation displayed by the resistant strains was due to genetic mutation, it would be expected that removing MV selection pressure for some generations would not affect response to future exposure to methyl viologen. On the other hand, if adaptation to methyl viologen were due to some generational-dependent “epigenetic” factors, as in phenotypic plasticity, the expected outcome of removal of selective pressure would be the loss of MV-adapted phenotypes.To test this, three independently adapted resistant strains (i.e. from separate culture flasks that had been treated with MV) and three unadapted wild types were isolated into individual colonies and inoculated into liquid cultures. The cultures were grown in the absence of MV selective pressure for a period corresponding to a whole bacterial growth curve (Fig.[1.7]()A). These cultures were then diluted and subdivided in flasks containing no or 6 M of methyl viologen (Fig.[1.7]()B) from the start of the experiment.

**A)** Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up to assess whether adaptation to MV is long-lasting and therefore likely genetic. **B)** Growth curves of clonal Synechocystis cultures during the removal of selection pressure (with the respective controls to confirm MV’s activity). **C)** Growth curves of cultures diluted at the end of the curves shown in (B). Methyl viologen (6M) was added ad time 0. The arrows originating from panel A do not indicate the timing of MV addition, but rather emphasise the stage of the timeline shown in A, where the growth curves presented in B and C were conducted.

As shown in Figure [1.7]()(C), even when MV was present from the start of the growth curve, previously adapted strains (mvR) could grow in the presence of a MV concentration lethal to wild type unadapted cultures. After reaching stationary state, the MV-resistant strains grown in the presence and absence of MV were then re-diluted and their growth in the presence of MV was monitored spectroscopically to yield samples mvR-11(MV-resistant strains continuously grown in the presence of MV) and mvR-01 (MV-resistant strains grown in the absence of MV for a full growth curve period and then subjected to MV treatment). As demonstrated in Figure [1.7]()(D), both mvR-01 and mvR-11 were insensitive to MV treatment, whereas wild type cultures displayed growth inhibition. These results indicated that the observed adaptive mechanism persisted even after long-term removal of selective pressure and therefore is likely to be a result of genetic effects.

### Comparative genomic analysis of wild type and MV-resistant _Synechocystis_ strains

The findings thus far suggested a genetic underpinning for the observed resistance exhibited by _Synechocystis_ cultures in the face of redox stress induced by methyl viologen. To identify genomic mutations that might underlie the observed long-term adaptation of MV-resistant strains, several experiments were then conducted. These aimed to isolate multiple independently adapted resistant strains, purify and sequence their genomic DNA, and identify potential mutations explaining the resistant phenotypes.

#### Genome extraction and sequencing

As a result of the ALE experiments, cultures had been growing for more than a month, and were exposed to considerable selective pressures. Therefore within individual flasks, different subpopulations could have been present, complicating future DNA sequencing analyses. To obtain clonal isolates, adapted and unadapted cultures were spotted at different dilutions on BG11 plates containing no or 6  methyl viologen. As shown in Figure [1.8](), only previously adapted strains (labelled with "mvR”) were able to survive on MV-containing plates. In order to sample as much genotypic space as possible resistant colonies were obtained with two distinct labtypes of wild type _Synechocystis_ strains, the “Nixon” (motile, and glucose intolerant) and “Howe” (non motile, glucose tolerant) as parent strains. Isolated colonies originating from several independently selected flasks were inoculated in liquid media and their DNA was purified using silica-based columns. After confirming the satisfactory integrity of the extracted genomic DNA by gel electrophoresis, the samples were sent for whole genome sequencing (WGS) to a commercial sequencing company (Novogene, UK). The genomic DNA was randomly sheared into short fragments. The obtained fragments were end repaired, A-tailed, and further ligated with Illumina adapters. The fragments with adapters were size-selected, PCR amplified, and purified. The library was checked with Qubit and real-time PCR for quantification and bioanalyser for size distribution assessment. Quantified libraries were pooled and sequenced on Illumina (PE150) platforms.

Spot plates of 2 unadapted (first two columns on each plates) and 5 adapted (columns 3 to 7) cultures of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 in BG11 plates without methyl viologen (A) and with the addition of 6  of methyl viologen (B). Rows correspond to consecutive 10-fold serial dilutions of culture inocula (all starting at an OD750 = 1). Plates were grown at 30  under constant white illumination (intensity = 100 molesms) for 10 days.

Table [[Tab:gDNA]]() summarises the results from the sequencing purification and sequencing experiments.

All samples exhibited high data quality, with effective percentages (the fraction of "clean” reads retained after filtering low quality ones) exceeding 99% for each sample. This indicates that a significant portion of the raw data was retained after processing, reflecting successful sequencing runs. The error rates for all samples were minimal, at 0.03%, demonstrating a high level of accuracy in base calling. Moreover, the Q20 and Q30 scores, which represent the proportion of bases with Phred values (a measure of base calling quality) greater than 20 and 30, respectively, were consistently high across all samples, exceeding 96% and 91%, respectively. Additionally, the GC content, which represents the percentage of G and C bases in the data, ranged from 46% to 55%, suggesting a balanced representation of nucleotides typical for cyanobacteria.

The resulting raw reads were trimmed to remove Illumina adapters and aligned against several reference genome sequences of _Synechocystis_ substrains available in the NCBI database. Figure [1.9]() shows the types and amounts of mutations when the reads from both wild type strains were aligned to various reference genomes. This was peerformed as multiple "wild type" _Synechocystis_ reference genomes exist, containing different sequences.

Mutation events categorized by type across two wild-type (WT) strains of Synechocystis ("Howe’’ and "Nixon’’), when aligned against several reference genome sequences.The mutation types are colour-coded according to the legend.

For both wild types, the GT-Kazusa reference showed the smallest number of sequence differences for the "Howe’’ strain, the highest number of sequence differences was observed with the GT-G reference sequence, predominantly comprising synonymous mutations, followed by non-coding and substitution mutations. In contrast, the "Nixon’’ strain exhibited the greatest number of sequence differences when aligned with the GT-T and PCC-N reference sequences. The "Nixon" strain displayed a more even distribution of mutation types, with frame shift mutations appearing more frequently than in the "Howe" strain. Insertions and deletions were comparatively less frequent than other mutation types across all reference sequences for both strains.

These mutations were then filtered to identify non-synonymous ones resulting in altered protein sequences or loss of function. When “Nixon’’ and “Howe’’ substrains were aligned to the GT-Kazusa reference (which appeared to be the most closely related), both strains exhibited 20 non-synonymous mutations. Figures [1.10]() and [1.11]() illustrate the locations and descriptions of the non-synonymous mutations identified in the “Nixon’’ and “Howe’’ substrains respectively when aligned to the GT-Kazusa reference genome.

Trimmed and paired reads from whole genome sequencing experiments of Synechocystis "Nixon” wild type aligned to reference "Kazusa” strain (NC000911). Numbered are mutation events found within coding sequences of the reference genome.

Trimmed and paired reads from whole genome sequencing experiments of Synechocystis "Howe” wild type aligned to reference "Kazusa” strain (NC000911). Numbered are mutation events found within coding sequences of the reference genome.

In order to identify genotypic differences between the "Howe” and "Nixon” substrains, all variants identified were filtered to retain only the ones that were unique to one or other strain. A direct comparison between by aligning the two genomes was not feasible due to the computationally intensive effort needed for de nov genome assembly. Additionally, de novo DNA assembly would also generate a consensus DNA sequence, leading to loss of information regarding the coverage and low-frequency variants. This was performed for each of the reference sequence that the reads were aligned to. Table [[Tab:NixMut]]() and [[Tab:MutHowe]]() summarises the unique mutations found in the "Nixon” and "Howe” substrains respectively. Most of these mutations, however, only appear at low frequencies (<50%) Interestingly the "Nixon’’ substrains harboured a deletion in the glycosyltransferase family 4 protein, and a frame shift in the sugar porter family MFS transporter protein (sll0771). These mutations may explain its inability to grow photoheterotrophically. In the "Howe” substrain a deletion in the type IV pilus twitching motility protein PilT and a substitution in in PilM were identified. These might underlie the non-motile phenotype of the "Howe” substrains.

#### Identification of mutations associated with MV resistance

After having analysed the genome sequences of wild type strains and having identified the unique mutations that characterise them, it was possible to identify mutations specific to MV resistant strains. To do this, the genomes from MV resistant strains were analysed as for wild type strains, but any mutation events also present in the respective wild type sequences were filtered out. Figure [1.12]() illustrates the results of a comparative analysis of all the sequenced MV-resistant strains and their genomic landscape.

Comparative genomic analysis of multiple MV-R strains. Circular representation of genomes with concentric circles corresponding to different strains. White ticks denote single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across both coding and non-coding sequences, while black lines indicate non-synonymous mutations within coding sequences (CDSs). All depicted mutations have been filtered to exclude those present in respective background strains.

The comparative genomic analysis revealed various mutations across different loci, although similar mutations were recovered independently in different lineages. As described in Table[1.14]() One of the affected loci was sll1180, observed in the mvR01-Nixon, mvR02-Nixon, and mvR03-Nixon strains. This locus encodes a peptidase domain-containing ABC transporter hlyB. Interestingly, another strain (mvR06-Nixon) encoded a mutation in the neighbouring sll1181 locus, corresponding to a HlyD family efflux transporter periplasmic adaptor subunit. Additionally, the slr1174 locus was affected in multiple strains: mvR10-Howe, mvR11-Howe, mvR12-Howe, and mvR6-Nixon. This gene encodes an ABC-2 family transporter protein. Mutations were identified in the slr1609 locus, which encodes a long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase, in the strains mvR01-Nixon, mvR03-Nixon, and mvR06-Nixon. An additional affected locus included slr0262 (coding for a NAD(P)H dehydrogenase subunit) in the mvR10-Howe strain. Notably, codon changes were observed in these loci, leading to specific amino acid changes. For example, in the sll1180 locus, a CTA to CCA change occurred, resulting in a L139P amino acid change. Similarly, in slr1174, a CGC to GGC change led to an R115G amino acid change, while another mutation in the same gene (CGC to CAC) resulted in an R115H change. Overall, when mutations also found in wild type strains were removed, each individual strain exhibited no more than three unique non-synonymous mutations following MV adaptation. One outlier was provided by the strain mvR09-Howe, which did not show any non-synonymous mutations when WGS reads were aligned to the reference GT-Kazusa genome.

#### Pre-existing genetic basis for MV resistance in wild type population

Unexpectedly, a number of these mutations were shared between independently evolved strains, indicating a possible common mechanism or pathway influencing methyl viologen resistance in these strains. Leveraging the high coverage obtained by the deep sequencing experiments, the frequency of each base among the reads at the locations of the identified mutations in the corresponding wild-type strains was calculated. As observed in Table [1.14](), a clear substrain-dependent enrichment of variants corresponding to the shared mutational events was observed. For example, for the mutation in the sll1180 gene, a polymorphic site where 10.4% of the reads from the Nixon wild type strain showed the same mutated base that was present in 100% of the reads in the three Nixon MV-resistant strains mvR01, mvR02, and mvR03. The Nixon-derived mvR06 strain showed the same frequencies as the Nixon wild type at that locus. On the other hand, 100% of the reads from the Howe wild type and the Howe-derived mvR09 at the same location were equal to the reference base. The same principle of apparently convergent mutations being present at low frequency in the wild type appeared true for the other shared mutational events in slr1174 and slr1609 in the Howe and Nixon substrains respectively. This indicated that the shared mutations observed in MV-resistant strains were already present at low frequencies in the wild-type populations and became enriched following MV treatment. Conversely, the mutations that were picked up only once did not appear to present at low frequencies in wild type populations.

### Phenotypic characterisation of wild type and MV-resistant strains

After having identified the genetic changes that took place in cultures following MV adaptation, further experiments were conducted to understand the impact of the observed mutations on the phenotypes of the strains. Given the beneficial aspect of these mutations in the face of challenging redox environments, and considering that such mutations were also present at low frequencies in wild type strains, why did they not fix in the wild type strains? Are there fitness costs associated with resistance to methyl viologen? Are strains resistant to MV-induced oxidative stress also more tolerant to oxidative stress imposed by high light intensities? These were the questions that the following experiments aimed to address.

#### Growth curve experiments

In order to understand the impact of the evolution of MV resistance on the growth of cyanobacteria, growth curve measurements were performed on cultures growing at low and higher light intensities in the presence or absence of MV. Each of the sequenced strain was streaked on a BG11 plate. From each strain, three biological replicates were inoculated in BG11 liquid medium and their growth was monitored spectroscopically.

Growth measurements of WT and mvR Synechocystis strains.

At the lower light intensity without MV (Fig.[1.13]()a), strains showed slightly different growth rates, iwhih were in between the respective wild types. However these dissferences were not significant, indicating that MV resistance did not impose considerable fitness costs under these conditions. As expected, upon exposure to 6 M MV at the lower light intensity (Fig.[1.13]()b), the wild type strains demonstrated significant growth inhibition, while the MV-resistant mutants maintained higher growth rates, indicating effective MV resistance.

When the light intensity was increased without MV (Fig.[1.13]()c), the growth rates of all strains were enhanced compared to lower light intensities. Interestingly, the two wild type strains exhibited significantly faster growth rates in the exponential phase, demonstrating a fitness cost associated with MV resistance at higher light intensities. As expected, in the presence of 6 M MV at the high light intensity (Fig.[1.13]()d), the wild-type strains’ growth was severely inhibited, while the MV-resistant mutants continued to exhibit robust growth rates.

#### Oxygen evolution measurements

To quantify further the fitness costs associated with MV resistance, oxygen electrode measurements were conducted on wild type and resistant cultures to measure oxygenic photosynthetic activities for each strain. Three independent colonies from each strain were grown photoautotrophically (40 E) until they reached mid-log phase and then oxygen evolution rate was measured as a function of applied light intensity.

Growth and oxygen evolution measurements from WT and mvR Synechocystis strains.

Expectedly, as shown in Fig.[1.14]()c, MV treatment resulted in significantly reduced oxygenic photosynthetic activity in wild type strains (ca. 7.6-fold and 8.8-fold reduction in “Nixon” and “Howe” strains respectively). Rates of oxygen evolution observed in the resistant strains were were not decreased by MV, indicating the mutants could perform oxygenic photosynthesis even in the presence of methyl viologen (Fig.[1.14]()c). However, when resistant strains were grown in the absence of MV, they showed significantly reduced rates of oxygen evolution (Fig.[1.14]()a) compared to the wild type strains, especially at high light intensities. These reductions in oxygen evolution rates were consistent with the reduced growth rates displayed by resistant strains when grown at higher light intensities (Fig.[1.13]()c).

### Electrochemical characterisation of wild type and resistant strains in bioelectrochemical devices; measurement of extracellular MV concentration

Genomic analyses indicated that mutant strains mostly had mutations in genes for membrane transport components, and oxygen electrode experiments demonstrated that the toxic effect of MV, which stems from its intracellular interaction with PSI, was bypassed in mutant strains. However, the findings presented so far did not explain the effects of the observed mutations and the mechanisms by which MV’s toxicity is bypassed. Leveraging MV’s membrane permeability and redox activity, a series of electrochemical experiments was conducted to characterise the electrogenic and MV-transport activities of both wild type and resistant strains in the presence and absence of MV.

#### Effect of MV on the electrogenic activity of wild type and MV-resistant strains

Methyl viologen is a redox active molecule that is often employed in bioelectrochemical systems as redox mediator to shuttle electrons. Thanks to its low midpoint potential, it can accept electrons from photosystem I. For this reason it is often suggested as a redox mediator in bioelectrochemical devices containing live cyanobacteria, although it is rarely utilised, due to its potent cytotoxicity. Having evolved multiple MV-resistant strains of _Synechocystis_, it was therefore possible to interface cyanobacteria with methyl viologen in bioelectrochemical devices and characterise MV’s effect on the electrogenic activity of cyanobacteria. Measurements of electric current generated by cyanobacterial biofilms (chronoamperometry) when subjected to dark light cycles over time were performed. Biofilms of wild type and resistant cultures were loaded onto biophotovoltaic devices containing flat ITO electrodes and open air platinum based cathodes.

Chronoamperometries at 0.3 V (vs Ag/AgCl reference electrode) of Synechocystis biofilms (250 nmol of chlorophyll a) loaded on ITO-coated flat electrodes subjected to two hours dark (gray panels) and light (white panels, light intensity= 100molesms cycles). A) Measurements performed on three biological replicates of Synechocystis wild types “Howe" and “Nixon” in BG11. B) Measurements performed on three biological replicates of Synechocystis wild types “Howe" and “Nixon” in BG11 + 6 M MV. C) Measurements performed on MV-resistant Synechocystis strains from both “Nixon” (mvR1-6) and “Howe” (mvR9-12) backgrounds in BG11. D) Measurements performed on MV-resistant Synechocystis strains from both “Nixon” (mvR1-6) and “Howe” (mvR9-12) backgrounds in BG1 + 6 M MV. MV was introduced in the anodic chamber at time 0.

As shown in Figure [1.15](), when MV was absent from the electrolyte chamber both wild-type and mutant strains produced photocurrents of similar amplitudes and profiles, despite exhibiting minor differences probably due to variability in experimental conditions. However, upon addition of MV into the anodic chamber, the electrogenic profiles from the wild type and MV adapted strains displayed significant differences. During the initial three light cycles, wild-type strains generated large photocurrents, reaching amplitudes nearly three times greater than those observed without the presence of MV. Subsequently, the electrogenic activity decreased, and the photocurrent profiles were no longer detectable. By the experiment’s end, the formerly green biofilm of cells adhering to the electrode had turned white, suggesting cell toxicity. Conversely, the MV-adapted strains, when subjected to MV, produced photocurrents similar to those recorded in the absence of MV. Unlike the wild type cultures exposed to MV, the biofilms derived from the MV-adapted strains remained green and viable until the conclusion of the experiment.

#### Voltammetric characterisation of transmembrane MV transport

In order to to quantify the concentration of MV in the cultures’ supertanatants following MV treatment, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed. Cultures of wild types and resistant strains were treated with MV and grown photoautotrophically. After 4 and 15 hours post treatment, the cells were centrifuged and the concentration of extracellular MV was quantified by performing CVs on the supernatant. At a potential of ca. -0.5 V vs Ag/AgCl, MV can reduce molecular oxygen. CV was therefore performed with or without nitrogen purging to estimate MV concentration as the amplitude of the peak underlying oxygen reduciton, which is catalysed by MV.

Cyclic voltammetries (performed with a scan rate of 5mV/sec) of the supernatant of WT and MV-resistant cultures following (4 hour and 15 hour) treatment with 6 M MV. Dotted lines indicate the scans performed at the corresponding time in the absence of oxygen (following 10 min nitrogen purging). Black arrows illustrate the peak underlying oxygen reduction rections, which MV catalyses.

As shown in Fig.[1.16](), the CVs showed that the supernatant from all cultures showed characteristic MV redox peaks, indicating that MV has not been degraded. As observed by comparing, for each plot, the curves in the presence of oxygen between 4 and 15 hours (as indicated by the black double headed arrows), the concentration of MV in the supernatant from wild-type cultures decreased over time. The curves in the absence of oxygen were performed as "negative controls” to observe the onset potential for oxygen reduction. This indicated that in these cultures MV was reduced into its membrane permeable form, moved intracellularly, thus resulting in the disappearance of MV from the supernatant. On the contrary, the oxygen reduction peaks catalysed by MV in the supernatant from all resistant cultures remained almost unchanged. This confirmed that resistant strains displayed a reduced intracellular accumulation of MV following MV treatment.

## Discussion

### Synechocystis adapts spontaneously to the ROS-mediated bactericidal effects of MV in photoautotrophic conditions

This study demonstrated that _Synechocystis_ cells can evolve resistance to the bactericidal effects of methyl viologen without prior mutagenesis. Although wild type cultures bleached after treatment with MV at concentrations as low as 1 M, emergence of green and viable cultures was observed during liquid cultivation after a period of apparent growth inhibition. These adapted cultures were insensitive to addition of freshly prepared MV, indicating that such growth resurgence was a result of biological evolution rather than abiotic degradation of the chemical, as often observed in the case of beta-lactam antibiotics, for example (Brouwers et al., 2020). Emergence of spontaneous mutants was observed for both “Howe’’ and “Nixon’’ _Synechocystis_ substrains, but occurred only when MV was added at concentrations lower than 100 M and during mid-log growth. However, it should be noted that the growth-stage experiment (Fig. [1.5]()) used a different strain (‘Howe’ ) than the "Nixon" strain employed for the concentration-dependent experiment (Fig. [1.1]()) It might be that the Howe substrain was less able to develop resistance, and the appearance of resistance in mid-log phase only was a chance effect. Given the subsequent detection of MV-resistance alleles at low frequencies even within unadapted cultures, the resurgence of proliferating cultures following the phase of apparent growth inhibition can presumably be explained as a period during which the majority of cells died, while a few carrying the beneficial polymorphisms (perhaps at a higher frequency) resisted and maintained their growth, eventually reaching a state where the cultures regained visible greenness. (Babykin et al., 2003) and (Prosecka et al., 2009) previously reported spontaneous MV-resistant mutants of Synechocystis, which were obtained by successive rounds of re-streaking on solid plates. The results show that it was possible to recapitulate the isolation of one of the mutations observed by (Prosecka et al., 2009), and isolated several others. This study also expands on previous work by identifying the conditions in which such adaptive evolution can occur in liquid cultures during photoautotrophic cultivation. This may be advantageous for screening cyanobacterial strains robust to oxidative stress in larger scale Adaptive Laboratory Evolution (ALE) experiments using liquid-based continuous cultivation systems and industrial photobioreactors, as demonstrated by similar efforts aimed at enhancing photosynthesis (Dann et al. (2021); Sun et al. (2023)) .

### MV resistance in Synechocystis is efflux-mediated

Given that MV treatment can significantly alter gene expression profiles, antioxidant responses (Li et al. (2002); Kim & Suh (2005)) and the secretome (Ongley, Pengelly & Neilan (2016);Hu et al. (2022) of cyanobacteria, it was important to determine whether the observed adaptation to MV was consistent with a genetic or some other mode of resistance (Adam et al., 2008). The persistence of resistance following long-term cultivation in the absence of selective pressure, suggested that resistance is accompanied by changes in the DNA sequence. For the first time in studies on MV resistance, genomes from MV-resistant strains were fully sequenced and analysed, which further corroborated the hypothesis of genetic changes, and identified a number of mutations specific to MV-adapted strains.

All mutants with the exception of mvR-09 (for which no mutation was identified) contained mutations in genes for either the ABC transporter slr1174 or the type I S-layer secretion system. Interestingly, (Prosecka et al., 2009) isolated MV-resistant strains with mutations affecting the same conserved R115 residue of slr1174 as we observed for strains mvR6,10,11,12, thereby directly hinting at a role for slr1174 in MV resistance. By performing site-directed mutagenesis they confirmed the importance of this residue in conferring resistance to MV and suggested that changes in this residue determine the substrate specificity of the transporter. Four other strains isolated here had single nucleotide mutations in the sll1180-sll1181 operon, which encodes the type I system that secretes the S-layer protein (Agarwal et al., 2018) and has been implicated in antibiotic and acid stress tolerance (Uchiyama et al., 2019). Additionally, three strains from the motile and glucose-tolerant “Nixon” wildtype had a mutation in the slr1609 gene, encoding a long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase (Berlepsch et al., 2012). Given that ROS can cause damage to lipids via peroxidation reactions (Bus, Aust & Gibson, 1974), such a mutation might further help the cells to cope with MV-induced toxicity. Unlike (Nefedova et al., 2003) no mutations in the MATE-type efflux transporter PrqA, which was previously implicated in controlling MV resistance in _Synechocystis_, were found. In addition, adaptive evolution experiments using _Synechocystis_ strains that lacked or overexpressed the prqA gene indicated that this gene, although possibly important for determining susceptibility to sublethal MV concentrations, is not essential for the long-term evolution of MV resistance.

Although there is no single mechanism to obtain antimicrobial resistance, this is generally achieved via reduction in intracellular drug accumulation (reduced permeability and/or antibiotic efflux), modification or alteration of the bacterial antibiotic target, modification or destruction of the drug itself, and bypass of whole metabolic pathways (Darby et al., 2022). The sequencing results presented here indicate that all resistant strains, with the exception of one (mvR-09, for which no mutation was identified) had non-synonymous mutations in genes for membrane transporter components. Corroborating previous studies (Nefedova et al. (2003); Hu et al. (2022); Ongley, Pengelly & Neilan (2016); Prosecka et al. (2009)), these findings therefore suggest that the mode of MV resistance in _Synechocystis_ is efflux-mediated.

### Substrain-specific genetic plasticity underscores Synechocystis adaptability against MV-induced redox stress

At first, it was surprising to observe such a high frequency of shared mutational events in independently evolved strains. Given that adaptive evolution was performed in different flasks (which remained always sealed post MV treatment) inoculated from different colonies and subjected to independent MV treatments, it is unlikely that such shared mutational events were a result of cross-contamination. A principal component analysis (not shown) which considered all mutations (also in non-coding regions and non-synonymous) indeed discarded this possibility. Furthermore, strains that harboured the shared mutational events differed significantly between each other when all mutations were considered. No two strains had the identical set of mutations overall. Convergent evolution to this extent seems unlikely, especially as alternative mutations for some genes would also confer MV resistance (for example for R115 in the product of slr1174). The alternative explanation is that those mutations that were isolated repeatedly in some substrains and not others were already present at low frequency in wild type strains and were enriched in MV-resistant strains by natural selection following MV treatment. The variant frequency analysis performed in wild type strains indeed confirmed that the beneficial mutations observed in MV resistant mutants were also present at low frequencies in wild type, unadapted cultures originating from clonal populations. Interstingly, single cyanobacterial cells have been shown to possess multiple non-equivalent genomes, which was true not only for the oligoploid _Synechococcus elongatus_ PCC 7942 but also for the highly polyploid _Synechocystis_, which contains 10–20 genome copies per cell (Soppa, 2021), although the actual number is still debated. For example, (Griese, Lange & Soppa, 2011) suggested that _Synechocystis_ contains more than 200 genome copies per cell. Genome polyploidy could allow for a larger genetic "playground", wherein certain gene copies can undergo mutations without drastically compromising overall cellular function. This redundancy may have been evolutionarily favoured, especially in changing environments where adaptability is crucial. Here for the first time this study provides evidence that such genomic polymorphism in clonal populations of cyanobacteria might have a biological function in providing a pool of polymorphisms to facilitate adaptation to changing environments. Further experiments using single cell genome sequencing and RNA-seq will be useful to further corroborate this mechanism.

### Consequences of MV adaptation

After having identified that genetic mutations underlying MV resistant strains, characterisation experiments were performed to assess the trade-offs which often accompany the evolution of antibiotic resistance (Phan & Ferenci, 2017). All isolated MV-resistant strains showed reduced rates of oxygen evolution compared to wild types in the absence of MV. This suggests a negative impact of MV resistance on the fitness of cyanobacterial cells and explains why the observed, conditionally beneficial resistance mutations have not fixed in wild type populations, being maintained as polymorphism as a balancing selection.

Electrochemical techniques proved successful in probing the effect of MV resistance on the extracellular electron transfer of cyanobacteria and in estimating the extent of MV transport into the cell. As shown by chronoamperometry in BPV devices containing wild type strains, MV dramatically increased the photocurrent, confirming its ability to accept intracellular photosynthetic electrons and reduce extracellular electrodes. However, such large photocurrent were short lived and the biofilms adhering to the electrodes became bleached, suggesting that extracting electrons from PSI with MV leads to ROS production and cell death.

On the contrary, MV-resistant strains in the presence of MV displayed similar photocurrents than those observed in its absence and remained viable at the end of the experiment. This suggests that MV-resistant strains of Synechocystis achieve resistance primarily by abolishing intracellular accumulation of MV or by inhibiting its redox activity (e.g. by chemical degradation). Cyclic voltammetries performed on the supernatant of cultures after 4 or 15 hours post MV treatment indicated that the extracellular concentration of MV in MV-resistant cultures remained unchanged over time, whereas it declined (as MV penetrated intracellularly) in the wild types. This finding provides direct evidence that the reduction of intracellular MV accumulation is the mode of resistance, corroborating the genomic observations. This is a double-edged sword for their bioelectrochemical exploitation. On one hand, these strains can survive in MV-rich environments, which is advantageous for their ecological competitiveness and potential biotechnological applications. On the other hand, the very mechanism that confers resistance— the prevention of intracellular MV accumulation—negates the utility of MV as a redox mediator for these strains. In essence, if MV cannot accumulate intracellularly, it cannot serve its role in shuttling electrons from intracellular metabolic pathways to the electrode. This means that while MV-resistant strains can survive in environments where MV is present, they cannot offer the enhancement of photocurrents that MV typically offers.

### Conclusions and Future Work

Despite the aforementioned trade-offs, the MV-resistant strains isolated in this study will still be useful to study the redox metabolism of cyanobacteria and may prove beneficial for future biotechnological applications. For example, MV-resistant strains could be used in co-culture based bioelectrochemical devices in which cyanobacteria provide sugars to electroactive heterotrophic bacteria in the same chamber (Zhu et al., 2022), where MV could be added as a redox mediator to enhance the performance without compromising the photosynthetic activity of the primary producers.

Future work should also determine whether enhanced efflux of methyl viologen as displayed by the strains isolated here, also leads to enhanced efflux of additional toxic compounds in a generalised way. If so, this approach might be beneficial to enhance the secretion of target compounds for photobioproduction. If the strains were able to carry out enhanced efflux of other compounds, this would explain the persistence of the MV alleles in strains that are not usually exposed to this compound.

The proposal that wild type strains contain a pool of "alleles” that may allow rapid response to selection will be important for understanding how cyanobacteria respond to environmental stresses. It will be interesting to see if wild type strains contain pools of alleles that allow rapid response to a various different stresses.

Adam, M., Murali, B., Glenn, N.O. & Potter, S.S. (2008) Epigenetic inheritance based evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. _BMC Evolutionary Biology_. 8. doi:[10.1186/1471-2148-8-52](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2148-8-52).

Agarwal, R., Whitelegge, J.P., Saini, S. & Shrivastav, A.P. (2018) The S-layer biogenesis system of _Synechocystis_ 6803: Role of Sll1180 and Sll1181 (_e. Coli_ HlyB and HlyD analogs) as type-I secretion components for Sll1951 export. _Biochimica et Biophysica Acta - Biomembranes_. 1860, 1436–1446. doi:[10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2018.04.006).

Amel, L., Ruiz, M. & Zhang, C.-C. (2009) Oxidative stress in cyanobacteria. _FEMS Microbiology Reviews_. 33 (2), 258–278.

Aulenta, F., Catervi, A., Majone, M., Panero, S., Reale, P. & Rossetti, S. (2007) Electron transfer from a solid-state electrode assisted by methyl viologen sustains efficient microbial reductive dechlorination of TCE. _Environmental Science and Technology_. 41, 2554–2559. doi:[10.1021/es0624321](https://doi.org/10.1021/es0624321).

Babykin, M.M., Sidoruk, K.V., Zinchenko, V.V., Nefedova, L.N., Cerff, R. & Shestakov, S.V. (2003) On the involvement of the regulatory gene prqR in the development of resistance to methyl viologen in cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _Russian Journal of Genetics_. 39, 18–24. doi:[10.1023/A:1022010525032/METRICS](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1022010525032/METRICS).

Berlepsch, S. von, Kunz, H.H., Brodesser, S., Fink, P., Marin, K., Flügge, U.I. & Gierth, M. (2012) The acyl-acyl carrier protein synthetase from _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803 mediates fatty acid import. _Plant Physiology_. 159, 606–617. doi:[10.1104/pp.112.195263](https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.112.195263).

Brian, R.C., Homer, R.F., Stubbs, J. & Jones, R.L. (1958) A NEW HERBICIDE 1’-ETHYLENE-2 : 2’-DIPYRIDYLIUM DIBROMIDE. _NATURE February_.15 pp.1–1.

Brocks, J.J., Logan, G.A., Buick, R. & Summons, R.E. (1999) Archean molecular fossils and the early rise of eukaryotes. _Science_. 285, 1033–1036.

Brouwers, R., Vass, H., Dawson, A., Squires, T., Tavaddod, S. & Allen, R.J. (2020) Stability of beta-lactam antibiotics in bacterial growth media. _PLoS ONE_. 15. doi:[10.1371/journal.pone.0236198](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0236198).

Brusslan, J. & Haselkorn, R. (1988) Molecular genetics of herbicide resistance in cyanobacteria. _Photosynthesis research_. 17, 115–124. doi:[10.1007/BF00047684](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00047684).

Bus, J.S., Aust, S.D. & Gibson, J.E. (1974) SUPEROXIDE-AND SINGLET OXYGEN-CATALYZED LIPID PEROXIDATION AS a POSSIBLE MECHANISM FOR PARAQUAT (METHYL VIOLOGEN) TOXICITY. _BIOCHEMICAL AND BIOPHYSICAL RESEARCH COMMUNICATIONS_. 58.

Campbell, W.S. & Laudenbach, D.E. (1995) Characterization of four superoxide dismutase genes from a filamentous cyanobacterium. _Journal of Bacteriology_. 177, 964–972. doi:[10.1128/JB.177.4.964-972.1995](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.177.4.964-972.1995).

Corona, F. & Martinez, J. (2013) Phenotypic resistance to antibiotics. _Antibiotics_. 2 (2), 237–255. doi:[10.3390/antibiotics2020237](https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics2020237).

Dann, M., Ortiz, E.M., Thomas, M., Guljamow, A., Lehmann, M., Schaefer, H. & Leister, D. (2021) Enhancing photosynthesis at high light levels by adaptive laboratory evolution. _Nature Plants_. 7, 681–695. doi:[10.1038/s41477-021-00904-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-021-00904-2).

Darby, E.M., Trampari, E., Siasat, P., Gaya, M.S., Alav, I., Webber, M.A. & Blair, J.M.A. (2022) Molecular mechanisms of antibiotic resistance revisited. _Nature Reviews Microbiology 2022 21:5_. 21, 280–295. doi:[10.1038/s41579-022-00820-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-022-00820-y).

Dietrich, L.E., Tice, M.M. & Newman, D.K. (2006) The co-evolution of life and Earth. _Current Biology_. 16 (11), R395–R400.

Eisler, R. (1990) _Biological report paraquat hazards to fish, wildlife, and invertebrates: A synoptic review, contaminant hazard reviews_.

Farrington, J.A., Ebert, M., Land, E.J. & Fletcher, K. (1973) Bipyridylium quaternary salts and related compounds. V. Pulse radiolysis studies of the reaction of paraquat radical with oxygen. Implications for the mode of action of bipyridyl herbicides. _Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Bioenergetics_. 314, 372–381. doi:[10.1016/0005-2728(73)90121-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/0005-2728(73)90121-7).

Gao, H. & Xu, dong (2012) The cyanobacterial NAD kinase gene sll1415 is required for photoheterotrophic growth and cellular redox homeostasis in _synechocystis sp._ Strain PCC 6803. _Journal of Bacteriology_. 194, 218–224. doi:[10.1128/JB.05873-11](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.05873-11).

Gemünde, A., Lai, B., Pause, L., Krömer, J. & Holtmann, D. (2022) Redox mediators in microbial electrochemical systems. _ChemElectroChem_.9. doi:[10.1002/celc.202200216](https://doi.org/10.1002/celc.202200216).

Griese, M., Lange, C. & Soppa, J. (2011) Ploidy in cyanobacteria. _FEMS Microbiology Letters_. 323 (2), 124–131. doi:[10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02368.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02368.x).

Hu, X., Luo, K., Ji, K., Wang, L. & Chen, W. (2022) ABC transporter slr0982 affects response of _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803 to oxidative stress caused by methyl viologen. _Research in Microbiology_. 173. doi:[10.1016/j.resmic.2021.103888](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resmic.2021.103888).

Jayathilake, B.S., Bhattacharya, S., Vaidehi, N. & Narayanan, S.R. (2019) Efficient and selective electrochemically driven enzyme-catalyzed reduction of carbon dioxide to formate using formate dehydrogenase and an artificial cofactor. _Accounts of Chemical Research_. 52, 676–685. doi:[10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00551](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00551).

Jiang, Q., Li, T., Yang, J., Aitchison, C.M., Huang, J., Chen, Y., Huang, F., Wang, Q., Cooper, A.I. & Liu, L.N. (2023) Synthetic engineering of a new biocatalyst encapsulating [NiFe]-hydrogenases for enhanced hydrogen production. _Journal of Materials Chemistry B_. 11, 2684–2692. doi:[10.1039/d2tb02781j](https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tb02781j).

Kalyanaraman, B., Darley-Usmar, V., Davies, K.J.A., Dennery, P.A., Forman, H.J., Grisham, M.B., Mann, G.E., Moore, K., Roberts, L.J. & Ischiropoulos, H. (2012) Measuring reactive oxygen and nitrogen species with fluorescent probes: Challenges and limitations. _Free Radical Biology and Medicine_. 52 (1), 1–6. doi:[10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.09.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.09.030).

Kim, J.H. & Suh, K.H. (2005) Light-dependent expression of superoxide dismutase from cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ Strain PCC 6803. _Archives of Microbiology_. 183, 218–223. doi:[10.1007/S00203-005-0766-9/FIGURES/2](https://doi.org/10.1007/S00203-005-0766-9/FIGURES/2).

Lawrence, J.M., Egan, R.M., Hoefer, T., Scarampi, A., Shang, L., Howe, C.J. & Zhang, J.Z. (2023) Rewiring photosynthetic electron transport chains for solar energy conversion. _Nature Reviews Bioengineering_. 1 (12), 887–905. doi:[10.1038/s44222-023-00093-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-023-00093-x).

Lawrence, J.M., Yin, Y., Bombelli, P., Scarampi, A., Storch, M., Wey, L.T., Climent-Catala, A., Team, P. iGEM, Baldwin, G.S., Howe, C.J., Zhang, J.Z., Ouldridge, T.E. & Ledesma-Amaro, R. (2022) Synthetic biology and bioelectrochemical tools for electrogenetic system engineering. _Sci. Adv_. 8, 5091.

Li, T., Huang, X., Zhou, R., Liu, Y., Li, B., Nomura, C. & Zhao, J. (2002) Differential expression and localization of Mn and Fe superoxide dismutases in the heterocystous cyanobacterium _anabaena sp._ Strain PCC 7120. _Journal of Bacteriology_. 184, 5096–5103. doi:[10.1128/JB.184.18.5096-5103.2002/ASSET/2506F188-14D0-454A-A48A-6BD3B0CBC896/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/JB1820284008.JPEG](https://doi.org/10.1128/JB.184.18.5096-5103.2002/ASSET/2506F188-14D0-454A-A48A-6BD3B0CBC896/ASSETS/GRAPHIC/JB1820284008.JPEG).

Mata-Cabana, A., Garcı́a-Domı́nguez, M., Florencio, F.J. & Lindahl, M. (2012) Thiol-based redox modulation of a cyanobacterial eukaryotic-type serine/threonine kinase required for oxidative stress tolerance. _https://home.liebertpub.com/ars_. 17, 521–533. doi:[10.1089/ARS.2011.4483](https://doi.org/10.1089/ARS.2011.4483).

Michaelis, L. & Hill, E.S. (1933) The viologen indicartors. _J Gen Physiol_. 16, 859–873.

Milton, R.D., Cai, R., Abdellaoui, S., Leech, D., Lacey, A.L.D., Pita, M. & Minteer, S.D. (2017) Bioelectrochemical Haber-Bosch process: An ammonia-producing H2/N2 fuel cell. _Angewandte Chemie_. 129, 2724–2727. doi:[10.1002/ange.201612500](https://doi.org/10.1002/ange.201612500).

Nefedova, L., Fantin, Y.S., Zinchenko, V. & Babykin, M.M. (2003) The _prqA_ and _mvrA_ genes encoding drug efflux proteins control resistance to methyl viologen in the cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _Russian Journal of Genetics_. 39 (3), 264–268.

Oh, S. & Montgomery, B.L. (2019) Roles of CpcF and CpCG1 in peroxiredoxin-mediated oxidative stress responses and cellular fitness in the cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _Frontiers in Microbiology_. 10. doi:[10.3389/fmicb.2019.01059](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01059).

Ongley, S.E., Pengelly, J.J.L. & Neilan, B.A. (2016) A multidrug efflux response to methyl viologen and acriflavine toxicity in the cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _Journal of Applied Phycology_. 28, 2793–2803. doi:[10.1007/s10811-016-0816-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10811-016-0816-5).

Phan, K. & Ferenci, T. (2017) The fitness costs and trade-off shapes associated with the exclusion of nine antibiotics by OmpF porin channels. _ISME Journal_. 11, 1472–1482. doi:[10.1038/ismej.2016.202](https://doi.org/10.1038/ismej.2016.202).

Prosecka, J., Orlov, A.V., Fantin, Y.S., Zinchenko, V.V., Babykin, M.M. & Tichy, M. (2009) A novel ATP-binding cassette transporter is responsible for resistance to viologen herbicides in the cyanobacterium _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _FEBS Journal_. 276, 4001–4011. doi:[10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07109.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07109.x).

Schirrmeister, B.E., Gugger, M. & Donoghue, P.C.J. (2015) Cyanobacteria and the great oxidation event: Evidence from genes and fossils A. Smith (ed.). _Palaeontology_. 58 (5), 769–785. doi:[10.1111/pala.12178](https://doi.org/10.1111/pala.12178).

Sétif, P. (2015) Electron-transfer kinetics in cyanobacterial cells: Methyl viologen is a poor inhibitor of linear electron flow. _Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Bioenergetics_. 1847, 212–222. doi:[10.1016/J.BBABIO.2014.10.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BBABIO.2014.10.008).

Soppa, J. (2021) Non-equivalent genomes in polyploid prokaryotes. _Nature Microbiology_. 7, 186–188. doi:[10.1038/s41564-021-01034-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-021-01034-3).

Sun, H., Luan, G., Ma, Y., Lou, W., Chen, R., Feng, D., Zhang, S., Sun, J. & Lu, X. (2023) Engineered hypermutation adapts cyanobacterial photosynthesis to combined high light and high temperature stress. _Nature Communications_. 14. doi:[10.1038/s41467-023-36964-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-36964-5).

Thomas, D.J., Avenson, T.J., Thomas, J.B. & Herbert, S.K. (1998) A cyanobacterium lacking iron superoxide dismutase is sensitized to oxidative stress induced with methyl viologen but is not sensitized to oxidative stress induced with norflurazon. _Plant Physiology_. 116, 1593.

Uchiyama, J., Itagaki, A., Ishikawa, H., Tanaka, Y., Kohga, H., Nakahara, A., Imaida, A., Tahara, H. & Ohta, H. (2019) Characterization of ABC transporter genes, sll1180, sll1181, and slr1270, involved in acid stress tolerance of _synechocystis sp._ PCC 6803. _Photosynthesis Research_. 139, 325–335. doi:[10.1007/s11120-018-0548-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11120-018-0548-2).

Vaishampayan, A. (1984) Strong mutagenic action of a bipyridylium herbicide in a N2-fixing blue-green alga. _Experientia_. 40, 1016–1019. doi:[10.1007/BF01946487](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01946487).

Weidel, H. & Russo, M. (1882) Studien über das pyridin [Studies of pyridine]. _Monatshefte für Chemie (in German)_. 3, 850–885.

Wesseling, C., De Joode, B.V.W., Ruepert, C., León, C., Monge, P., Hermosillo, H. & Partanen, L.J. (2001) Paraquat in developing countries. _International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health_. 7 (4), 275–286. doi:[10.1179/oeh.2001.7.4.275](https://doi.org/10.1179/oeh.2001.7.4.275).

Zhu, H., Xu, L., Luan, G., Zhan, T., Kang, Z., Li, C., Lu, X., Zhang, X., Zhu, Z., Zhang, Y. & Li, Y. (2022) A miniaturized bionic ocean-battery mimicking the structure of marine microbial ecosystems. _Nature Communications_. 13. doi:[10.1038/s41467-022-33358-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-33358-x).


</div>

---
Annotations: 0,75084 SHA-256 e4e7d978a8cc3cbc38a189de891fb3bd  
@Alberto Scarampi <scaralbi>: 3,6 11,35 79 147,2 304 330 355,4 362 388 394,12 416,12 429,10 440,14 480 524,9 544 573,24 671,12 703,14 733,12 760,12 793,6 800,6 822,6 829,6 856,8 865,6 877,6 884,6 949,6 956,6 1032,6 1039,6 1126 2688,4 2987,7 2995,6  
...
